Blockchain: Technological Revolution in Business and Administration

Ehab Khalifa
Future Center for Advanced Research and Studies

Blockchain is the Technology which allows assets to be transferred from one party to another
simultaneously and without needing a third party, guaranteeing utmost security. In addition, it is a
multiple global ledgers, shared by all people around the world, which enables them to do all kinds of
transactions (Sutardja Center for Entrepreneurship & Technology Technical Report, 2015) in real time
and without falling prey to fraud or manipulation. Besides, it is the biggest data bases, accessible to all
people (BigchainDB, 2016) and containing verified assets which can be safely exchanged.

Blockchain will have a huge effect on deferent levels, it will change the way all people adopt to deal
through decades and threat traditional intermediary parties, on the other side it faces many obstacles
stumbling blocks to be fully operated in different fields. This paper try to address the mechanism of
blockchain technology, and how it works in simple words, then determine the possible applications of
blockchain, and how to make best use of this technology, and finally the threats and challenges of
blockchain.

WHY BLOCKCHAIN IS A REVOLUTION?

The blockchain system was first used in 2008 as the main platform for Bitcoin's virtual currency.
Thanks to Blockchain, this cryptocurrency has won users’ trust, so far at least. It is a common
misconception that Bitcoin and Blockchain are one and the same; the truth is that the latter can be
regarded as the backbone of the former, which distinguishes it from other digital currency systems
(KAYE Scholar, 2018). It is worth mentioning that the Blockchain system can be used in many other
applications.

Traditional transactions and asset transfer usually involve mediators. These can be banks, necessary
for money transfer, a ministry entitled to register transactions, a real estate publicity department to verify
ownership, a real estate broker, etc. These intermediary entities are usually paid for their services.
Blockchain provides an alternative where files are transferred, stored and managed with no need for such
mediators. To be more accurate, the real mediator in this case would be millions of computers connected
to the chain. The transaction moves from one computer to another in an encrypted form that guarantees
safety, rules out the possibility of manipulation, forgery or fraud and secures registration priority rights.
This poses a threat to millions of people around the world who would be more than likely to lose their
Jobs because of this system.

40 American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019
As a matter of fact, what makes Blockchain one of the driving forces of the smart revolution which
humanity is witnessing, as well as one of the most important tools that would help people manage their
life better, is the following:

1,

The ability to transfer original files: The typical situation when transferring files is that only
copies of these files are transferred. For instance, when an email, or a file, is sent via the
internet, the data sent can be retained by the sender, as what is sent is actually a copy, not an
original. This is undoubtedly not suitable when the thing to be transferred is money; you
simply cannot send one hundred dollars to someone and keep them for yourself at the same
time. This also applies to voting, intellectual property rights, patents and to cases where one
buys the original files of songs and movies so that no other party can have access to them
(Tapscott, 2018).

Immunity to manipulation: Perhaps more important is Blockchain’s immunity to
manipulation. Blockchain prevents fraud during and after transactions. It guarantees the
security of such processes as transferring money, parcels, containers, etc., registering
contracts or property, shipping goods, routing and doing government transactions. Depending
on Blockchain prevents any attempt of manipulation that would constitute a threat to the
country’s financial resources or result in denying certain parties their right to a level playing
field. Thus, depending on Blockchain would play an essential role in combating corruption as
it ensures that transactions will not be altered, modified or deleted later. This would help
create an atmosphere of confidence among users (Sutardja Center for Entrepreneurship &
Technology Technical Report, 2015).

HOW DOES BLOCKCHAIN WORK?

Blockchain functions according to three operating principles that together constitute the basis
underlying the system and govern all transactions among users. These are:

1,

The open ledger principle:

This refers to the accessibility of the information in Blockchain to everyone. In other
words, everyone on a certain chain would be able to see everyone else’s assets. For instance,
if the chain is a money transfer chain everyone on it can see the others’ money. However,
people can choose not to reveal their identities, as Blockchain makes it possible for them to
use nicknames suggested by the chain. Thus, while it would be difficult to get information
about others’ identities, information about their assets would be available to all users with
utmost transparency (Iansiti and Lakhani, 2017).

Perhaps an example would be useful here. If (A) wishes to transfer ten dollars to (B), all
the chain users will be able to know whether (B) has ten dollars. In case s/he does not, the
transaction will not be completed as people would refrain from responding. If s/he does have
the money then the person nearest him, say (C), will give (B) the money in return for a
percentage of the money that (A) wants to transfer.

One disadvantage to this operating principle is that 1t makes it possible for people to
know personal information about others on the chain. Having access to a user’s ledger makes
it possible to know, for example, that he 1s a family man and that he transfers money to his
family members (wife, children, etc.). It also makes it possible for people to know how much
money he has and when exactly he transfers money to his wife, etc. Such information can be
utilized in criminal activities targeting this user’s family.

Distributed database:

The main objective of this principle is overcoming centralization. This is simply because
the principle makes it impossible for only one party, be it a server, a computer, etc., to have
control over the chain. The chain is actually distributed among all its users around the world.
Anyone can easily download the chain, have access to it and be part of it. This means more

American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019 41
safety as hackers cannot tamper with, or hack, the chain unless they hack every single user of
it (lansiti and Lakhani, 2017).
3. Mining process:

This means that millions of computers around the world take part in making sure that a
given transaction is correct before 1t can be completed. If a user wanted to transfer money to
another via the blockchain the transaction would not be completed, even if the money was
available, unless mining occurred first. Miming means employing the abilities of the
computers in searching for the correct “Hash” that distinguishes the transaction so that it can
be completed successfully. Using their computers, miners around the world engage in
sophisticated mathematical processes with the aim of arriving at the correct hash that links
the current transaction to the previous transaction and distinguishes it from other transactions
occurring in the chain. Mining is undertaken with a view to making sure that all the
transactions entering the chain have taken the same time that the it took before in previous
blocks (Kaspersky, 2017).

Once the correct hash is arrived at, the new transaction is permitted into the chain and is
added to the other transactions in the blocks, eventually forming a blockchain
(bitcoinexchangeguide, 2018). This makes it difficult for hackers to hack the system or even
manipulate it, as doing such things would require hacking all the computers at the same time.
Once the transaction is verified it can be completed. The miner who arrives at the correct
hash gets a percentage of the transferred money, by way of reward. If the matter involves
transferring Bitcoin currency the miner gets a reward for taking part in the mining process.

Any blockchain consists of four main elements: the block (which is the unit of which the
chain is made), information, hash and timestamp. Following are more details:

e The block: A block is a number of processes or tasks that must be undertaken
inside the chain. Examples are money transfer, data registration, following up a
case, etc. Usually each block can accommodate a specific number of processes
and information. No additional information or processes are accepted. Once the
processes in question are completed a new block, related to what has gone
before, 1s created. The main objective here 1s to avoid any fake processes that can
cause the chain to freeze or be inoperative.

e Information: This refers to subsidiary processes that take place inside a given
block. In other words, it is a single order that occurs in the block and, together
with other orders and information, constitutes the block itself.

e Hash: This can be described as the chain’s DNA, occasionally referred to as the
digital signature. It is a code produced via an algorithm in the blockchain
software, called “Hash function” (Northcutt, 2018).

A hash performs the following functions:

e Distinguishing the chain from other chains: as each chain has a unique hash.

e Distinguishing one block from another: as, again, each block has its own hash.

e Distinguishing each piece of information by means of a unique hash.

e Linking the chain’s blocks to one another: as each block is linked to both the
preceding hash and the following hash. Thus, the hash moves in one direction
only-namely, from the block in question to the one next to it, and so on. This is
why a hash renders ineffectual any attempt to make alterations to the
already created blocks.

4. Timestamp: Or the time which any process inside the chain has taken (Parker, 2018).

42 American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019
APPLICATIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN

In addition to being used in transferring money, both traditionally and virtually, a Blockchain can
serve many, different purposes. These will be explained in the following section:

1. Registering property: A Blockchain can be used in registering property, be it personal assets
(e.g. real estate, jewelry, precious stones, cars, etc.), patents, or intellectual property rights
( of books, songs, poems, etc.). It can even be used in registering ordinary ideas which
cannot be regarded as innovations or accomplishments in the usual sense of the word. In
brief, A Blockchain can be used in registering whatever one owns and wishes to advertise
or register with the aim of preventing others from claiming it, so that s/he can sell it later
or use it in transactions via the Blockchain system (Malinger, 2017).

2. Registering transactions: This applies to transactions between individuals, inside companies
or inside governmental or non-governmental institutions. This is simply because the
Blockchain system allows everyone to insert all kinds of data, whether these data have to do
with government transactions (Medium, 2017), production line tracking, planes and tankers
routing, financial transactions registering, property transfer, and customer service follow-up,
to name but a few of the kinds of transactions that the system can be used for registering. This
facilitates detecting gaps and weak points, combating corruption and controlling quality.

3. Facilitating mediation: The Blockchain system replaces traditional intermediary parties.
Instead of banks (in money transfer), real estate departments (in registering property), traffic
departments (in registering vehicles), brokers (in financial transactions) and mediator service
companies (such as Uber), millions of people around the world who use the Blockchain act as
mediators, benefiting from the financial outcome which traditional mediators would have got
in return for their services. Small as it is, the outcome the Blockchain users achieves equal
distribution of wealth.

The processes involved in using the Blockchain system can be clarified via some practical examples,
as follows:

In case an individual wishes to buy a piece of land from another, s/he accesses the ledger where all
users have registered their assets and engages in the transaction of buying the needed piece of land from
its owner. Based on the aforementioned principle of open ledger as it is, the Blockchain system gives the
potential buyer access to a detailed history of the piece of land in question, including the exact dates on
which it was sold and bought till 1t came to be owned by its current owner.

Once negotiations end and all is settled, the current owner transfers the ownership of the piece of land
to the new owner via the same ledger. Not only will all users witness the transaction but they will actually
contribute to its success as verifying it is no longer the responsibility of the real estate department but
these users’ responsibility. There will be no need to consult the city and neighbourhood services
department in charge of information concerning land ownership and transactions, simply because large
numbers of miners, even millions of them in some cases, will take part im the verification of the
transaction. Though they will be paid for their efforts necessary to guarantee the security of the
transaction, what they get is far less than what traditional verification entities get. This enhances the
principle of equal distribution of wealth, no matter how small this “wealth” is.

Not only can the Blockchain system play an effective role in transferring the piece of land’s
ownership, but it can also be utilized in transferring the buyer’s money to the seller with no need for
banks and like mediators. This can be achieved through depending on the medium using Blockchain, such
as Due.com. Depending on such a nontraditional mediator saves both costs and time; while traditional
money transfer can take three to seven days, transfer via Blockchain only takes a few minutes and no
mediation fees are paid; the user only pays for using the system, in which case the fees are low.

An important question in this connection is: can the ledger be hacked and can the data be tampered
with? The answer is: this is very unlikely to happen since the ledger is not a single central database but a
database distributed among users around the world. In other words, each user has his/her own copy of the
ledger. Consequently, in order for a hacker to hack a transaction occurring in the ledger s/he has to be

American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019 43
able to hack each and every user of the ledger, on condition that hacking them all should occur
simultaneously. This is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to happen, because the hacking attempt,
which will naturally take the form of a transaction, will not be completed unless all users confirm and
register it.

Blockchain can also be employed in sophisticated administrative processes, such as tracking a
container ship travelling from, say, China to Europe but has to stop at a number of ports for such purposes
as unloading and loading goods, getting fuel, getting food for the crew, etc. The first step here would be
creating a block for the journey-namely, the Genius block. This will contain all the information about the
starting point of the journey and the containers that the ship 1s carrying. The hash mechanism creates the
hash that will distinguish this block and connect all the chain’s blocks to one another. It will also create
the timestamp for performing the transaction in the chain.

Once the ship arrives at the first port, where it will unload some contamers before it resumes its
journey, a new block will be created in the chain, containing information about the containers which have
been unloaded, the hash of the new block and the timestamp. The second hash is henceforth linked to the
first hash so that any attempt to make alterations to the information concerning the starting point of the
journey will be rejected by the chain.

By the time the ship reaches its fmal destination a large number of blocks will have been
accumulated. Each of these blocks will represent a point where a number of containers were unloaded,
and each of these points will be linked to a hash which, in return, will be linked to all the preceding and
following hashes. Thus, all hashes will be moving in one direction, from the original block to the last
block. Because no alterations are allowed, failure to unload containers, or failure to unload them in the
right port, can be easily detected, and the party accountable can be easily identified. In addition, this
method prevents stealing and scamming, as each container is registered in the chain and all the details of
its route are retraceable. As a result, if a container contained smuggled goods or drugs, the doer, or at least
the party that facilitated such a crime through negligence, could be easily identified.

BENEFITS OF USING THE BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY

Blockchain offers its users many advantages. As an administrative and financial system, it is capable
of fulfilling many purposes, meanwhile saving time, effort and costs. It also makes it possible to monitor
all operations and processes and detect their initiators, guaranteeing a high degree of security. Besides, it
remarkably reduces the risk of fraud and manipulation, thanks to the hash mechanism, here are the
following:

1. Offering an effective alternative to bureaucratic red tape: Using the Blockchain system in
government departments means more efficiency, as all formation concerning transactions,
as well as documents, certificates, etc., are assigned definite positions in the chain, and can be
easily retrieved whenever need arises. This helps avoid time-consuming red tape associated
with traditional, bureaucratic government transactions (Williams, 2017).

2. Guaranteeing quality assurance: The Blockchain allows users to keep track of the
transaction’s progress status, which results in high-quality services. For instance, using
Blockchain in a food production line guarantees that the final products will be characterized
by their remarkable quality (Agrawal, 2018).

3. Combating corruption: The Blockchain is almost immune to fraud and manipulation attempts,
simply because it does not allow users to modify or delete transactions. As a matter of fact,
the system keeps track of all the steps of transactions, as well as of the exact time each step
takes place. In case an attempt of manipulation occurs the system rejects the transaction and
prevents its initiator from re-trying. This helps minimize the threat of corruption.

4. Equal distribution of wealth: Using the Blockchain system puts an end to the monopoly
certain corporations and organizations hold on wealth, guaranteeing that everyone has a fair
share of wealth, since all people around the world can take part in managing transactions and
get paid for this.

44 American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019
POTENTIAL THREATS OF BLOCKCHAIN

Despite its various advantages, the Blockchain technology can pose certain threats, among the most
serious of which are the following:

1,

Endangering mediating jobs and institutions: This is by far the most serious threat of the
Blockchain system as far as monetary, administrative and intermediary sectors are concerned.
Depending on the Blockchain system means that, gradually, the need for such sectors would
diminish, and they could eventually be “extinct”, so to speak. This situation 1s similar to the
implications of industrialization for certain crafts and professions which are now history
because of the many technological advances that have made them dispensable. Unless the
aforementioned sectors adapt to the new situation, they will meet a similar destiny (Cardone,
2017).

Abuse of the system: The Blockchain system can be used in illegal activities, such as drug
dealing, prostitution, arms trafficking, etc. Needless to say, this constitutes a great threat to
society’s security and individuals’ welfare and interests.

The possibility of stealing users’ personal information: Though Blockchains are immune to
manipulation from outside the chain, users in the chain can steal the personal information of
other users and use it in manipulating these users’ assets, selling them, or even endangering
these users’ jobs, etc.

Endangering service availability and accessibility: This is still a potential threat that can
paralyze the chain, despite the fact that the system is designed so as to prevent such a risk
through limiting the capacity of each block (Medium, 2017).

Hacking: Though, as already mentioned, it is rather difficult to hack Blockchain because this
requires that all users and miners be hacked simultaneously, hacking remains a potential
threat. This is particularly true for chains with relatively small numbers of users and miners.

CHALLENGES AND STUMBLING BLOCKS

Perhaps it is worth noting that the Blockchain technology has not gained wide currency and
acceptance among people yet. It has not yet invaded many fields where it would be of great use.
Following are some of the stumbling blocks facing the Blockchain Technology:

1,

Problems that have to do with popularity: Though the Blockchain technology has been in use
for more than ten years, it did not gain enough popularity among users. It was not “openly”
used for any purposes other than exchanging Bitcoin currency. Therefore, it can be said that
the system has not gained wide acceptance yet, the reason probably being the technical
sophistication of the system which makes it difficult to use (Kasireddy, 2017).

Problems pertaining to replacing the old traditional systems with the new one: These have to
do with the stability that the old systems have acquired in the course of time due to the fact
that, despite their shortcomings, they have always done the job efficiently. Banks and money
transfer companies, registration offices and like institutions have been operating for decades,
gaining acceptance, authority and credibility over the years, which makes it difficult for the
relatively new Blockchain system to simply take over from them, especially in some sectors.
Lack of trust: People may feel less willing to trust the Blockchain system because
information about its designer is lacking. All we know is that in 2008, with the world
financial crisis, a person supposedly called Satoshi Nakamoto devised a new system for
exchanging currency without needing mediation from banks and financial institutions. The
system, which has come to be known as Blockchain, has been used ever since for exchanging
Bitcoin currency.

Issues that have to do with accountability: The aforementioned avoidance of centralization
has its own shortcomings. In case faults, hacking or scam occur, it will be impossible to
decide who is responsible since there is no one party or entity that can be considered in

American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019 45
charge of controlling and managing the system and consequently held accountable for the
situation.

5. Issues that have to do with cost: doing the needed transactions and making transfers need
many computers with certain specifications. Besides, these computers consume a lot of
energy, which should be taken into consideration, given the recent considerable increase in
energy prices.

REFERENCES

Agrawal, J. (2018, January 18). 8 Benefits of Blockchain to Industries Beyond Cryptocurrency. Retrieved
from https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/306420

An Analysis of the Opportunities and Threats in Blockchain Technology (2018, February 13). Retrieved
from https://medium.com/the-mission/an-analysis-of-the-opportunities-and-threats-in-blockchain-
technology-6f55d647be3e

A Scalable Blockchain Database (2016). BigchainDB, Berlin, Germany, June 8, p1.

Betsy, P. (2017, May 31). Blockchain — Distributed Ledger Technology Application Benefits? Retrieved
from https://bitcoinexchangeguide.com/blockchain-distributed-ledger-technology/

BlockChain Technology (2015). Sutardja Center for Entrepreneurship & Technology Technical Report.
Brekely University of California, October 16, p1.

BlockChain Technology (2017), Ob cit, p5

Eaton-Cardone, M. (2017, January 4). How blockchain will affect financial services employment.
Retrieved from https://news.efinancialcareers.com/gulf-en/269710/how-blockchain-will-affect-
financial-services-employment/

Eyal Malinger, B. (2017, November 18). Blockchain could ‘change everything’ for real estate. Retrieved
from https://venturebeat.com/2017/11/18/blockchain-could-change-every thing-for-real-estate/

Tansiti, M., & Lakhani, K. R. (2017). The Truth About Blockchain. Retrieved from
https://hbr.org/2017/0 1/the-truth-about-blockchain

Kasireddy, P. (2017, December 11). Fundamental challenges with public blockchains. Retrieved from
https://medium.com/@preethikasireddy/fundamental-challenges-with-public-blockchains-
253c800e9428

Northceutt, 8. (2018). Hash Functions, SANS™ Technology Institute. Retrieved from
https://Awww.sans.edu/cy ber-research/security-laboratory/article/hash-functions

Parker, L. (2015, February 10). Timestamping on The Blockchain. Retrieved from
https://bravenewcoin.com/news/timestamping-on-the-blockchain/

Six myths about blockchain and Bitcoin: Debunking the effectiveness of the technology (2017, August
18). Kaspersky. Retrieved from https:/(www.kaspersky.com/blog/bitcoin-blockchain-
issues/18019/

Tapscott, D. (2016, June). How the blockchain is changing money and Business. TED Summit. Retrieved
from
https:/Awww.ted.com/talks/don_tapscott_how_the_blockchain_is changing money_and_business

Williams, S. (2017, December 11). 5 Big Advantages of Blockchain, and I Reason to Be Very Worried,
Fool. Retrieved from https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/12/11/5-big-advantages-of-
blockchaim-and-1-reason-to-be.aspx

46 American Journal of Management Vol. 19(2) 2019
