The Revolution will (not) be decentralised: Blockchains

Rachel O'Dwyer
23rd March 2015

The data centre rules.

Decentralised topologies and non-discriminatory protocols have been all but
replaced by a recentralisation of infrastructure, as powerful corporations now
gatekeep our networks. Everything might be accessible, but this access is
mediated by a centralised entity. Whoever controls the data centre exercises
political and economic control over communications. It’s difficult to see how
we can counteract these recentralising tendencies in order to build a common
core infrastructure. There are significant barriers in place. This includes the
age-old problem of scaling distributed forms of organisation beyond the local.
But it also includes barriers in terms of access and control of network
resources. There are political and economic constraints governing the
ownership and distribution of computational power, servers, bandwidth and
energy. While we can access any range of software applications for free, the
core network is always substantiated in property and provisioned on a scale
that blocks access to all but the most powerful actors.

These centralising tendencies have also reared their head in cryptocurrencies. If
Bitcoin was hailed as financially disruptive in much the way that VoIP and
mesh networks were thought to be disruptive to cellular, powerful mining pools
now control much of the infrastructure and rent-seeking individuals control a
lion’s share of Bitcoin’s value. But we don’t need to throw the baby out with
the bathwater. While Bitcoin in and of itself may be problematic as an
alterative currency, the underlying architecture has potentials not only for the
future of money, but also for the future of networked cooperation.

Equality as a standard

Blockchain-based technologies may still have a role to play. They look set to
have significant implications for money, for property and for cooperative
organisation going forward. For example, there’s been some discussion about
how the blockchain could support new forms of peer-production, and fully
decentralised infrastructures for applications as varied as finance, mesh
networks, cloud databases and share economies. The broader implication is that
the blockchain could support the activities and resources necessary to the
commons, as suggested in this recent article by David Bollier. At the same
time, there are a number of other important considerations going forward.
These include how key criteria like trust, property and governmentality are
architected within a blockchain and what centralising tendencies or emerging
possibilities for control might accompany this protocol. A lot of what follows is
pretty speculative, but worth discussing in the context of peer-production.

But first of all, what is the blockchain? The blockchain is the distributed ledger
that keeps track of all transactions made using the Bitcoin cryptocurrency.
Arguably this is Bitcoin’s key innovation, allowing users to transact without
the intervention of a trusted third party such as a Central Bank or Federal
Reserve. In what is sometimes called the second wave of blockchain
innovation, people are now looking at the underlying database as an
infrastructure for more than monetary transactions. Just as Bitcoin makes
certain financial intermediaries unnecessary, new innovations on the
blockchain remove the need for gatekeepers from other processes. The key
takeaway is that the blockchain could support not only cryptocurrencies but
also other financial instruments like equity, securities and derivatives; smart
contracts and smart property; new voting systems; identity and reputation
systems; distributed databases; and even the management of assets and
resources like energy and water. Because of the way it distributes consensus, it
routes around many of the challenges that typically arise with distributed forms
of organisation— issues such as how to cooperate, scale and collectively invest
in shared resources and infrastructures. There are a number of start-ups and
groups currently innovating in this space such as Ethereum, Ripple and
Mastercoin.

The Ethereum project really illustrates this possibility to abstract the
blockchain from a specifically monetary context to one in which we’ re thinking
about decentralised economies and services more generally. In short, it extends
the decentralised capabilities of Bitcoin beyond financial transactions. Bitcoin
involves two parameters: a trustless database (more on this later) and a
transactions system capable of sending value from place to place. In order to do
this, Bitcoin implements a simple scripting language. But this scripting
language is limited in terms of what it can do.[1] Bitcoin’s scripting language
lacks certain fine-grained controls and nuances that might be necessary to
provision other services. To do more complicated things, the expectation was
that you needed to create an entire meta-protocol layer or even a new
blockchain. Ethereum developers recognised that these functions could be
implemented and scaled if there was a stronger foundational layer with a
powerful scripting language for these protocols to be built on. Ethereum builds
a generalised framework that extends the capabilities of the blockchain to allow
developers to write new consensus applications. This is a blockchain with a
built in Turing-complete programming language, allowing anyone to create
applications and rules to support them. In this way, we move beyond monetary
transactions towards any number of foreseeable applications. [2]
How the blockchain might support a commons

Some of these applications are still speculative; some of them are already
implemented. Potential applications of Ethereum include peer-to-peer forms of
cloud computing or Dropbox; incentivised Wi-Fi mesh networking or big data
and machine learning; games and gambling; reputation systems; and of course
financial applications. Already existing applications include Airlock.me a
keyless access protocol; La’ Zooz, an alternative ride-sharing application; the
Eris stack, a distributed application server; Bitvote a distributed voting system;
and Traity and Cryptoswartz, both online reputation systems.

Distributed Organisations & the Trust Web: One significant claim is that
blockchain-based technologies such as Ethereum can support and _ scale
distributed forms of cooperation on a global scale. This has been referred to
under a few different names: the recent Coin Center report refers to Distributed
Collaborative Organisations, while Ethereum’s founding developer Vitalik
Buterin speaks elsewhere about Decentralised Autonomous Organisations. As
David Bollier recently pointed out, this model resonates with organisations that
are interested in fostering commons-based peer-production. Where questions
about how to reach consensus, negotiate trust and especially scale interactions
beyond the local are pervasive in the commons, the blockchain looks set to be a
game changer.

In this context, the blockchain is presented as an algorithmic tool to foster trust
in the absence of things like social capital, physical colocation or trusted third-
party management. These are actually referred to as ‘consensus’ algorithms,
and they are the staple of projects such as Ethereum and Ripple. As David
Cohen has described it “Trust, rules, identity, reputation and payment choices
are embedded at the peer level. Participants arrive already trusted and
decentrally acknowledged”. Cohen and Mougayar have dubbed this innovation
the “trust web” to describe the new suite of applications that weave network
value and consensus into the protocol itself, forgoing the social institutions and
relations that were previously mandatory.

Node Incentivisation: Another innovation is that Ethereum incentivises
participation, encouraging actors to contribute without introducing
centralisation. Ethereum also puts features in place to discourage centralisation
in the future.In order to use an Ethereum application, users make
micropayments to the developers in ether, Ethereum’s coin, or ‘cryptofuel’ as
they term it. This might be making a micropayment in turn for storage space on
a server or for acting as a relay in a mesh networking protocol. For example, in
a hypothetical Ethereum mesh network, anybody could act as a node, charging
small amounts for relaying people’s messages (in the region of a few
microcents per kb) and alternatively paying to have their own messages
relayed. We can take this further and reward people for other kinds of
contributions, such as writing source code or producing creative content on a
website. Monetary transactions aside, this encourages people to contribute to
the commons and puts systems in place to try and protect its resources from
commercial expropriation.

Decentralised Infrastructures: A third significant innovation is a change to
infrastructure. Ethereum describes itself as “an infrastructure for next
generation social and economic systems”. Blockchain innovations that manage
networks, servers or natural resources really do radicalise infrastructure. We’ re
no longer speaking about monolithic resources with prohibitive barriers to
entry, the quintessential server farm housed in some distant industrial estate.
Instead, we can imagine infrastructure as something immaterial and dispersed,
or managed through flexible and transient forms of ownership. Where powerful
servers, channels and processing capacities seem like the primary chokepoint
of open networks, the blockchain is a powerful antidote. As Buterin argues in a
recent interview:

We would build a decentralised Internet network where all of us would access
documents and content without going through a server. It means that you will
need zero infrastructure to develop and distribute applications.

The payoff seems to be that new blockchain-based technologies have the
potential to support new forms of commons-based peer production, supplying
necessary tools for cooperation and decision making, supporting
complementary currencies and even provisioning infrastructures.

Trust in the code

At this early stage of development, it’s also crucial to think about how criteria
like governance, property relations and modes of production are
engineered into the blockchain, and what centralising tendencies or emerging
possibilities for control might accompany this protocol. The issue most
frequently cited has to do with the difficulty of regulating rogue companies in a
distributed system. Primavera de Filippi, a researcher at the forefront of legal
challenges in distributed organisation, points to the difficulty regulating
companies and identifying who or what is in charge when things go wrong.
The blockchain is still anybody’s baby and not the exclusive bequest of groups
working towards a decentralised Internet or a ‘Post-Snowden’ Internet
economy. Companies from share economy start-ups to major players in IT are
looking to the blockchain for their next meal ticket. IBM, for example, is
currently in talks about a blockchain-tied cash system with a number of central
banks.

Other issues concern the design of trustless architectures and smart property.
Trustless Architectures: First of all, what kind of subjectivity does the

blockchain support? In the development of consensus algorithms and monetary
incentives, there’s an assumption that we can delegate much of the messiness
of human relations to algorithmic governance, anticipate the motivations of
individual actors and foreclose destructive behaviours. This comes back to this
question of trust, something I’ve already written about in relation to Bitcoin.
The claim being made is not that we can engineer trust in friends, institutions
or governments, but that we might dispense with them altogether in favour of
what Bill Maurer, Taylor C. Nelms and Lana Swartz refer to as ‘trust in the
code.’ As outlined in the Bitcoin whitepaper, proof-of-work is not a new form
of trust, but the abdication of trust altogether as social confidence in favour of
an algorithmic regulation. In other words, it doesn’t matter whether I believe in
my fellow peers just so long as I believe in the technical efficiency of the
blockchain protocol.

What kinds of subjectivity do we want to algorithmically inscribe into our
systems? Blockchain start-ups begin from the assumption that there is no trust
and no community, only individual economic agents acting in self-interest. Fair
enough, you might think, it’s precisely the fact that projects like Ethereum
engineer confidence and provide economic incentives for contribution that may
distinguish it from other services like Freenet. But it also proceeds from a
perspective that already presumes a neoliberal subject and an economic mode
of governance in the face of social and/or political problems. ‘How do we
manage and incentivise individual competitive economic agents?’ In doing so,
it not only codes for that subject, we might argue that it also reproduces that
subject.[3 |

Smart Property: Innovations in property and infrastructure also seem to go
both ways. While greater flexibility around ownership of core infrastructure is
arguably a good thing, the introduction of artificial scarcity and the new
controls implied by smart property also have worrying implications for Internet
copyright and Digital Rights Management. Property doesn’t disappear, but
instead it is enforced and exercised in different ways. If rights were previously
exercised through norms, laws, markets and architectures, today they are
algorithmically inscribed in the object.

Going forward, it’s clear that there are a number of considerations to take into
account, foremost not only how we provision the necessarily technical tools or
resources for building a commons, but how we work to cultivate the
necessarily kinds of social relations and subjectivity that might accompany this
shift. There is real potential in the blockchain if we appreciate it not as some
ultimate techno-fix but as a platform that, when combined with social and
political institutions, has real possibilities for the future of organisation.

[1] It can’t support more complicated forms of joint accounts or savings for
example.

[2] For more on this see the Ethereum Whitepaper.

[3] This is similar to criticisms that are sometimes made of Elinor Ostrum’s
approach to governing the commons.
